CSV As a Database (#29)
gSchool/ada-1-intro-to-ruby: 03-language-features/csv-as-a-database.md

##### !end-explanation

### !end-challenge

<!-- ======================= END CHALLENGE ======================= -->

<!-- >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> BEGIN CHALLENGE >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> -->
<!-- Replace everything in square brackets [] and remove brackets  -->

### !challenge

* type: short-answer
* id: 212f7e7d-b60f-4558-aa55-75021e7ca6b8
* title:  How many attributes does each planet have?
* points: 1
* topics: csv

##### !question

How many attributes does each planet have?

##### !end-question

##### !placeholder

##### !end-placeholder

##### !answer

/4|(four)/i

##### !end-answer

<!-- other optional sections -->
##### !hint

Are the attributes stored in the columns or rows?

##### !end-hint
<!-- !rubric - !end-rubric (markdown, instructors can see while scoring a checkpoint) -->
##### !explanation

There are 4 attributes, id, name, mass and distance.  There is one attribute for each column.

##### !end-explanation

### !end-challenge

<!-- ======================= END CHALLENGE ======================= -->

### Get a CSV File on your Computer

For the rest of this exercise, we will be working with a CSV file named `planets_data.csv`.

To setup:

> 1. Create a new directory for this exercise `$ mkdir csv-planets-exercise`
> 1. `$ cd csv-planets-exercise`
> 1. `$ touch planets_data.csv`
> 1. `$ mine .`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up the directory for this exercise:
```bash
$ mkdir csv-planets-exercise
$ cd csv-planets-exercise
$ touch planets_data.csv
$ mine .
```
```

The suggestion is eating the final triple backticks.

1. Copy and paste this snippet into your `planets_data.csv` file:

    ```bash
    1,Mercury,0.055,0.4
    2,Venus,0.815,0.7
    3,Earth,1.0,1.0
    4,Mars,0.107,1.5
    ```
1. Take a moment to observe this CSV file. What does it look like? How does this compare to arrays and hashes?

You can also run this code to generate the CSV file.  We'll skip the details on how it works.

```ruby
  require 'csv'
  planets = [
    [1, "Mercury", 0.055, 0.4],
    [2, "Venus", 0.815, 0.7],
    [3, "Earth", 1.0, 1.0],
    [4, "Mars", 0.107, 1.5]
  ]
  CSV.open("planets_data.csv", "w") do |file|
    planets.each do |planet|
      file << planet
    end
  end
```

> ## Writing Ruby Code to Read CSV Data

Reviewer: I think this should probably be its own file/lesson.

Reviewer: Either that or the headings should be normalized.  (The h2 below should be a h3, etc.)

require 'csv'

planets = CSV.read('planets_data.csv', headers: true)

ap planets
# => #<CSV::Table mode:col_or_row row_count:5>
```

This difference will be useful in the next step...

### Chaining `.each` Lets Us Look At One Record at a Time

We can chain `.each` to `CSV.read` and a whole `each` code block at the end of this line.

Observe this code:

```ruby
require 'awesome_print'
require 'csv'

CSV.read('planets_data.csv', headers: true).each do |record|
  ap "Hooray!"
  ap record
end
```

1. What does the variable `record` represent?
1. For each `record`, what two things does the code do?
1. What would be a better variable name for `record`?
1. What data type is each `record`?
    - What are the keys of each `record`?
    - What piece of code might have caused this?
    - What is the data type of the keys?

### Another Example, All Together

Observe this code that creates an array of planets that are not Earth:

```ruby
require 'awesome_print'
require 'csv'

planets_that_arent_earth = []

CSV.read('planets_data.csv', headers: true).each do |planet|
  if planet["name"] != "Earth"
    planets_that_arent_earth << planet
  end
end

ap planets_that_arent_earth
```

> 1. What does the variable `planets_that_arent_earth` represent? How do we use it?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. What does the variable `planets_that_arent_earth` represent?
  - How do we use it?
```

1. True or false: We can use conditionals, loops, call methods, read/assign/re-assign variables within this `each` loop.

How can we change this code so that we get an array of planets with a mass smaller than `0.5`?

## Summary

We should observe a pattern that our **source of data, or database** is a system of organizing data that can be separated from our Ruby code.

We can use Ruby code and `CSV.read` to read the CSV file.

We can use a combination of `CSV.read`, the `headers: true` option, and `.each` in order to iterate through this data.

## Bonus Syntax: `CSV.read` and Forcing `CSV::Table` to be an Array

> The data returned from `CSV.read` looks like an array of arrays or an array of hashes, but is infact a `CSV::Table`. To transform this data into an array of hashes we need to add the following onto our `.read` method: `CSV.read('planets_data.csv', headers: true).map(&:to_h)` when using headers and `CSV.read('planets_data.csv').map(&:to_a)` when not using headers.

Reviewer: Have we introduced the `&:method_name` syntax before?

If not:

```suggestion
The data returned from `CSV.read` looks like an array of arrays or an array of hashes, but is infact a `CSV::Table`. To transform this data into an array of hashes we need to add the following onto our `.read` method: `CSV.read('planets_data.csv', headers: true).map { |row| row.to_h }` when using headers and `CSV.read('planets_data.csv').map { |row| row.to_a }` when not using headers.
```

> ## Bonus: If We Need to Write to a CSV

Reviewer: I think including this might muddy the waters and we may want to cut it.

> `CSV.read` is great for reading data. However, it is impossible to actually write to a CSV file with `CSV.open`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CSV.read` is great for reading data. However, it is impossible to actually write to a CSV file with `CSV.read`.
```
